dev-docs/TO_DO.md, before:

# To-Do Checklist

**Last updated:** 2025-02-14 14:30  
**Changes:** Added time and changes line to header; added to-do for crosshair ROI position verification and documentation.

---

- [ ] Run assessment templates
- [ ] RUN SMOKE TESTS for exporting - check various export options, magnified, with ROIs and text, without, etc.
- [ ] Could consider more sophisticated smoothing but would need to use PIL rather than Qt (" If you want something “better” (e.g. bicubic or Lanczos), you’d have to do the resize yourself (e.g. with PIL/NumPy) and then hand the result to Qt for display.")
- [ ] Build a technical guide
- [ ] Double check fusion
    - [ ] Code not very responsive on Parallels with 3D fusion
    - [ ] Check visually accuracy on usual PET/CT study, compare 2D/3D modes
    - [ ] Ask AI agent to estimate difference in registration for some sample points of PET study registered to CT in 2D vs 3D mode and take screenshots (cloud agents)
    - [ ] Check fusion with some other studies
    - [ ] Improve Window/Leveling preset/auto in fusion mode
- [ ] See if I can make executables smaller especially on Mac
- [ ] Try to make code faster
- [ ] Make double-clicking on a subwindow expand it so it becomes a 1x1 layout but using whatever subwindow was double-clicked, not necessarily subwindow 1
- [ ] Allow syncing slices
- [ ] Show line for current slice location on different views (eg axial slice in one window show as line on a coronal view in another window)
- [ ] Differentiate between frame # and slice #?
- [ ] See qi-assessment recommendations

## More minor
- [ ] When an ROI is selected in one subwindow and we click into another subwindow, the ROI disappears from the ROI list in the right pane but the ROI statistics are still there until the user does something else in the new window or goes back to the first one and unselects the ROI. Clicking into a different subwindow should automatically unselect any selected ROI (and the statistics in the right pane should be cleared)

Commit message:

add plan for greater flexibility in subwindow assignments, swapping, layouts

dev-docs/TO_DO.md, after:

# To-Do Checklist

**Last updated:** 2025-02-14 14:30  
**Changes:** Added time and changes line to header; added to-do for crosshair ROI position verification and documentation.

---

- [ ] Run assessment templates
- [ ] RUN SMOKE TESTS for exporting - check various export options, magnified, with ROIs and text, without, etc.
- [ ] Could consider more sophisticated smoothing but would need to use PIL/numpy rather than Qt (" If you want something “better” (e.g. bicubic or Lanczos), you’d have to do the resize yourself (e.g. with PIL/NumPy) and then hand the result to Qt for display.")
- [ ] Build a technical guide
- [ ] Double check fusion
    - [ ] Code not very responsive on Parallels with 3D fusion
    - [ ] Check visually accuracy on usual PET/CT study, compare 2D/3D modes
    - [ ] Ask AI agent to estimate difference in registration for some sample points of PET study registered to CT in 2D vs 3D mode and take screenshots (cloud agents)
    - [ ] Check fusion with some other studies
    - [ ] Improve Window/Leveling preset/auto in fusion mode
- [ ] See if I can make executables smaller especially on Mac
- [ ] Try to make code faster
- [ ] Make it possible to choose which subwindows to expand/show when switching layouts instead of always showing subwindow 1 in 1x1 mode, or 1 and 2 in 2x1 or 2x1 mode. Could try making it possible to swap subwindows (eg, right click in subwindow X and select Swap with subwindow Y), or probably better would be to do something like to differentiate between the windows and the contents - maybe call those "views"? E.g., we could have 4 "views" - for now let's call them View A-D - which by default/initially are assigned View A in subwindow 1, view B in subwindow 2, etc., but which could be reassigned...
    - goals are: 1, make it possible to swap contents or placing of subwindows and/or be able to assign any view to any subwindow; 2, make it possible to magnify any subwindow to full 1x1 display; 3, make switching to 1x2 or 2x1 display use the currently focused subwindow as the "first" one shown and use the "next" subwindow as the other one
    - [ ] And make double-clicking on a subwindow expand it so it becomes a 1x1 layout showing only that subwindow
- [ ] Allow syncing slices
- [ ] Show line for current slice location on different views (eg axial slice in one window show as line on a coronal view in another window)
- [ ] Differentiate between frame # and slice #?
- [ ] See qi-assessment recommendations

## More minor
- [ ] When an ROI is selected in one subwindow and we click into another subwindow, the ROI disappears from the ROI list in the right pane but the ROI statistics are still there until the user does something else in the new window or goes back to the first one and unselects the ROI. Clicking into a different subwindow should automatically unselect any selected ROI (and the statistics in the right pane should be cleared)
